Multitenant pipeline design (#3389)
open-telemetry/otel-arrow: rust/otap-dataflow/docs/agent-multitenancy-design.md

## Request and tenant context

System operators require multiple tenants to share a pipeline
resources, with fine-grained limits configured to achieve isolation
and fairness between tenants. Tenant identification depends on the
use-case and what is being shared. How the engine identifies a tenant
is a matter of choice. It is often possible to express tenancy
directly through configuration, by associating specific resources with
specific tenants in whole terms. As an example, by giving each tenant
a dedicated port and pipeline, they can physically separate tenants
without the use of specific multi-tenant features. By isolating
whole-ports, whole CPUs, or whole threads to a single tenant or tenant
group, the operator may be able to avoid using tenant descriptors
entirely.

However, where there are context-specific attributes used for
limiting, a **tenant descriptor** will be used. A tenant descriptor is
a small vector of key:value identifiers which represent the current
tenant in some context. Usually, the context is a request, however,
custom contexts can be defined as long as a tenant descriptor can be
stored.

Tenant descriptors are multi-dimensional to enable tenant assignment

> in logically independent ways with user control ove rcardinality. For

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in logically independent ways with user control over cardinality. For
```

> in logically independent ways with user control ove rcardinality. For

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
in logically independent ways with user control over cardinality. For
```

example, a request may be accompanied by an environment name, a
project name, and a user name for three forms of tenancy. Choosing
three forms means a single limiter table with three-dimensions.

Multiple tenant descriptors per request are supported, enabling
multiple independent limiters with lower dimensions. For example, a
request may be accompanied by both an end-user tenant identifier and

> an acting-on-behalf-of tenant identifier. These are logically

Reviewer 2: I think the term "acting-on-behalf-of” should be clarified somewhere.

| Descriptor value  | The set of keys and values forming a resolved descriptor, with a number of associated table lookup keys.                                           |
| Key / value       | A single dimension of a tenant descriptor value.                                                                                                   |
| Entry             | A single `{ key, value }` term within a condition; no `value` means wildcard.                                                                      |
| Condition         | An ordered list of entries selecting a bucket; the first matching condition wins.                                                                  |
| Bucket            | Contains one distinct limiter instance per distinct set of entry keys for the matching condition, up to the cardinality limit.                     |

Descriptor actions are evaluated and the matching results are placed
in the request context where it passes with the request data in a
pipeline where individual nodes will apply specific limiters.

![A flow diagram showing how tenant descriptor values are computed and flow through the pipeline](./agent-multitenancy-diagram.svg)

> ### Tenant descriptor actions

Reviewer 2: The term "action" seems very generic here. Why not use the term "extractor" instead, or "definition" that better characterizes what is being done?
Alternatives: "Tenant description extractor", "Tenant descriptor definition", "Tenant descriptor spec", ...

Tenant descriptors originate in a series of actions, configured at the
top level, group-level, and pipeline-level of the dataflow engine
configuration, since these definitions are shared across pipeline

> groups. Descriptor values refer to one or more tenant associations,

Reviewer 2: I don't understand why we say that "these definitions are shared across pipeline groups" when, at the beginning of the sentence, we say that a tenant descriptor can be defined at the pipeline level. In that case, one would expect the descriptor not to be shared at the group level.

each association consisting of multiple keys and values and used as a
lookup key for evaluating limiter conditions. Tenant descriptor values
must be erased when they go out of scope to avoid leaking sensitive

> data across unintended boundaries.

Reviewer 2: I like this concept of boundaries.

Request actions are applied by receivers (or processors) when they
originate new request contexts. Descriptor actions support attribute
extraction in a variety of ways, for example,

- `receiver_id`, `source_node_id`: the first node or preceding node traversed by the request.
- `remote_address`, `masked_remote_address`: origin network address, optionally CIDR-masked.
- `generic_key`: a static, hard-coded key-value.
- `request_header`: copy a request header value into a descriptor key.

> - `request_header_match`: descriptor key value must match a condition.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `request_header_match`: request header value must match a condition.
```

Not 100% sure but that seems more coherent for me.

> - `request_header_match`: descriptor key value must match a condition.

Reviewer 2: In other parts of the project, we use the term "transport header" instead of "request header", which seems more appropriate to me.

> - `request_header_match`: descriptor key value must match a condition.

Reviewer 2: In the medium term, and to handle more complex cases, we should probably support OPL-based tenant descriptors so that OPL functions can be used.

Here, the term _request header_ is generic. Although we model these as
HTTP headers, receivers for other protocols are responsible for
deriving headers according to the protocol that is in use, using
semantic conventions as needed. The engine reserves the descriptor key
`signal` to identify the type of signal in the request (e.g., "logs").

### Tenant descriptor examples

Here is an example of a single descriptor action list based on the
client address, a hard-coded value, and an extracted request header as
the keys:

```yaml

> actions:

Reviewer 2: Not a big fan of the term `actions`

- key: client_address
  remote_address: {}     # use the network peer's socket address as the value
- key: route_name
  generic_key: http/otlp
- key: user_id
  request_header: x-user-id
```

Here is an example engine configuration defining three tenant
descriptors: two end-user forms (modern and legacy) and one
acting-on-behalf-of service descriptor.

```yaml
# Engine top-level descriptors, shared across all pipeline groups.

> descriptors:

Reviewer 2: I find the name of this section too generic, unless the intention is to use this descriptor concept in a broader context than just tenant descriptors. I suggest renaming this section to `tenant_descriptors`.

  enduser_tenant_modern:

>     actions:

Reviewer 2: Maybe this will be explained later in the document, but I don't understand the purpose of this intermediate `actions` level. Why not have the list of descriptor components directly under the tenant descriptor name?

    - key: customer_id
      request_header: x-customer-id
    - key: workspace_id
      request_header: x-workspace-id
    - key: tier
      request_header: x-customer-tier
  enduser_tenant_legacy:
    actions:
    - key: customer_id
      request_header: x-legacy-customer-id
    - key: workspace_id
      request_header: x-legacy-workspace-id
    # legacy tenants are identified by a version header
    - request_header_match: x-protocol-version
      value: "very-old"
  onbehalfof_tenant:
    actions:
    - key: service_id
      request_header: x-service-id
    - key: subscription_id
      request_header: x-subscription-id
groups:
  # ... pipeline groups reference the descriptors above ...
```

The Dataflow Engine's pipeline data type (`OtapPdata`) will be
modified to propagate tenant descriptors in the context. The interface
used by receivers (and processors) to construct new contexts from
headers will be extended to evaluate the list of descriptors. Every

> descriptor is evaluated for every request context. When all conditions

Reviewer 2: Shouldn't we use the term `OtapPdata` instead of `request`, as we do in the rest of the project?
For example, if we have a tenant descriptor processor, it feels odd to refer to a request.

succeed for a descriptor and request, the resulting descriptor value
is entered into the context.

### Resource-level tenants

At the top of the OpenTelemetry data model, the Resource value
describes a single producer of telemetry. When a pipeline request
contains data for a single resource, as typically produced by an OpenTelemetry SDK,
the request's resource attributes can be made to act like request headers as the input
for tenant descriptor actions.

Receivers for non-HTTP telemetry protocols that convey single-resource
requests may apply descriptor actions directly to resource
attributes. Limiters that are applied in those contexts may refer to
single-resource descriptor actions `resource_key` and

> `resource_key_match` to extract or conditionally extract tenancy

Reviewer 2: Why introducing a new term "resource key" here, while in the rest of the project we use the term "resource attribute" ?

information. These actions can only be applied in single-resource

> contexts. For example to extract a `service_name` tenant for the

Reviewer 2: What does this "single-resource context" mean exactly? Does it mean we can't apply multi-tenancy to batches containing multiple resources? Or does it mean we first have to partition/split the batches into smaller batches containing only one resource?

EDIT: I saw some partial answers just after this, but I'm still not completely clear about this limitation.

production namespace in a single-resource context:

```yaml
actions:
- key: service_name
  resource_key: service.name
- resource_key_match: service.namespace
  value: production
```

> These actions do not apply in contexts where multiple resources are

Reviewer 3: I may be missing something, but this feels like a core gap. Header-derived descriptors classify the whole request/batch as one tenant, while `resource_key` is single-resource only. For mixed-tenant batches, could we define the expected behavior here? The options below seem to sit at different levels (config rejection, runtime Nack, or unresolved/default), so it would help to specify which applies when.

present. Under this proposal, the options for handling multi-resource
requests with these resource descriptor actions are:

- Nack the request.
- Reject the configuration: callers asserts single-reource context or else
  invalid configuration.
- Do not resolve the action, the descriptor will be unresolved; receivers
  and limiters that require this descriptor will reject, otherwise these

>   requests will not match conditions and take the default limit.

Reviewer: I think we could use the concept of partitioning described here, if it were placed upstream of the thing that applies these actions, to mitigate the issue of mixed resource batches. 

This issue https://github.com/open-telemetry/otel-arrow/issues/3273 describes the ability to partition based on the result of some OPL expression. In this case the expression could simply be something like `resource.attributes["service.name"]`. 

Note: I imagine the partition-by-expression implementation will need to partition on multiple expressions so we can use the output for multiple actions (this is not called out in #3273, but seems like the right thing to do).

Routing and batching by tenant descriptor based on resource keys
generalizes in useful ways. Telemetry collection agents are sometimes
required to aggregate by both tenant-descriptor property and
sub-characteristic such as metric name or TraceId. In general, the
engine must add support splitting requests in these ways to enable
routing, shuffling, grouping and load balancing by tenant descriptor.

### Tenant trust

Pipeline operators are responsible for secure tenant
configurations. Tenant descriptors can be defined at multiple levels
of the engine configuration (e.g., global, pipeline group, pipeline)
to avoid leaking tenant details outside their scope. The dataflow

> engine is responsible for enforcing this discipline automatically.

Reviewer 2: Nice!

> Pipeline operators are advised not to use unauthenticated request

Reviewer 3: Can we make the trust model a bit more explicit here? If descriptors can come from headers, peer address, or resource attributes, it would help to define which sources are trusted and how they relate to authentication.

headers.

Pipeline operators are advised to configure sensible cardinality
limits to protect the pipeline.

### Routing/batching by tenant descriptor

Processors (e.g., fanout) and exporters (e.g., topic) will be
configurable to route by descriptor condition.

```yaml
nodes:
  tenant_split:

>     type: processor:tenant_router

Reviewer 2: I don't have a strong opinion on this yet. We already have a content router that could support this type of routing configuration. Is there an advantage to having a dedicated tenant router?

    config:

>       optional_descriptors: [enduser_tenant_modern, enduser_tenant_legacy]

Reviewer 2: What is the purpose of this list?

      # first-match wins
      routes:
      # customer_id=bigfish
      - entries:
        - key: customer_id
          value: bigfish

>         output: bigfish_pipeline

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure I’m correctly interpreting what constitutes an entry. Based on this YAML representation, it's a list of key/value pairs plus an output. But based on the definition table at the beginning of this document, it's just the list of key/value pairs.

      # for premium-tier customers
      - entries:
        - key: tier
          value: premium
        output: premium_pipeline
      # for any customer
      - entries:
        - key: customer_id
        output: shared_pipeline

>       default_output: fallback

Reviewer: Although https://github.com/open-telemetry/otel-arrow/issues/3310 only calls out headers, I really intended this to be catchall issue where we added the ability to access / manipulate batch metadata in OPL, and I believe this tenant description is something that could be included. If we did that, I imagine that this kind of tenant based routing could also be expressed in OPL and done through transform processor

```
signals |
if (tenant_descriptor["customer_id"] == "bigfish" ) { 
  route to "bigfish_pipeline" 
} |
if (tenant_descriptor["tier"] == "premium" ) {
  route to "premium_pipeline"
} |
if (tenant_descriptor["customer_id"] != null) {
  route_to "shared_pipeline"
} |
route_to "fallback"
```

    outputs:
      bigfish_pipeline: {...}
      premium_pipeline: {...}
      shared_pipeline: {...}
      fallback: {...}
```

The same applies to the batch processor specifically. Note that
[OpenTelemetry Collector supports batching by selected request headers
using
`sending_queue::batch::partition::metadata_keys`](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/blob/main/exporter/exporterhelper/README.md#sending-queue-batch-settings)
and a configurable cardinality limit. Tenant descriptors and batching
conditions will be used to this effect in the dataflow engine.

### Load balancing by tenant descriptor

The example above shows to isolate a small number of routes in static
configuration based on the tenant descriptor. Engines running on
multiple cores are also required to route and load balance when the

> number of descriptors is large.

Reviewer 2: In my view, the use of topics in this context is not solely due to the number of tenants, but more to the isolation mechanisms that can be applied to them.

> Load balancing by tenant descriptor will be organized using the

Reviewer 2: There is probably a good reason for using the term "tenant descriptor" instead of "tenant ID", but I'm not sure I understand the rationale behind it.

dataflow engine's topic broker infrastructure based using tenant
descriptors and conditions to compute a hash value, and then to use

> (hash-value % N) to distribute the request to one of N topic

Reviewer 2: We can imagine using topics in this context as you describe. Personally, I had another approach in mind: having one consumer group per tenant ID (load balancing by tenant ID rather than by hash), so that limits can be applied per tenant.

For the dynamic aspect, the idea was to define the concept of a pipeline template that could be automatically instantiated for each new tenant ID, with an explicit maximum limit, of course.

**To me, this load balancing by tenant ID at the topic level was the basic mechanism for managing multi-tenancy and the associated limits.**

receivers. The design of the load balancing mechanism is out of scope

> for this document and part of a larger scope. Often, there is a

Reviewer 2: Depending on the conclusion from my previous comment, I think the concept of load balancing at the topic level can either be considered out of scope for this first version of the document, or be central to it. I'll wait to read the rest of the document before giving my opinion on the subject.

simultaneous need to aggregate and load-balance multi-tenant request
by features in the data other than tenant, such as metric name or
TraceId. In both cases, the dataflow engine requires a mechanism to
create multi-tenant, multi-request batches destined for a single
consumer.

> ## Limiter extensions

Reviewer 2: In terms of implementation, I don't know yet what you have in mind, but one thing I'm sure of is that, in order to maintain the same level of performance, we absolutely need to avoid introducing any global synchronization mechanisms, as that would essentially negate all the work we've done so far.

We already have the concept of a policy in the project, which seems to me like the right term to use for defining rate limits or resource-based limits. We can definitely imagine policy extensions, but ideally I'd like the concept of policy to be used here.

example we can limit by request count, by in-memory bytes count, by
compressed bytes count, or by items of telemetry. Rate and resource
limiters have distinct extension interfaces, and implementations will
of course use different configuration; however, they generally use the
same model for multitenancy and share common configuration structs:

- **unit**: Describes the units of weight being limited. For rate
  limiters this must end with "/second" (e.g., `request_count/second`,
  `memory_bytes/second`). For resource limiters omit the rate suffix (e.g., `memory_bytes`). In the yaml configuration, this gives the
  raw numbers meaning; in the code, a verification step ensures that
  each limiter is used to limit the correct category of weight.
- **optional_descriptors**: Optional, a list of the tenant descriptors
  used by the limiter. These descriptor values are extracted from the
  request and used to evaluate conditions.
- **required_descriptors**: Optional, a list of the tenant descriptors
  used by the limiter that must be present, otherwise the request is
  immediately failed. These descriptor values are extracted from the

>   request and used to evaluate conditions.

Reviewer 2: We have optional `optional_descriptors` and optional `required_descriptors`, which seems a bit ambiguous/confusing on first read. :-)

Can't we derive everything from the `conditions` field?

  are satisfied for all the input descriptors, the conditional limit
  is chosen. The first matching condition is selected, otherwise a
  default is used.
- **cardinality**: Determines the limit of unique combinations for
  buckets in the limiter and what happens when the number is exceeded.

Users may provide one or both of `optional_descriptors` and
`required_descriptors`.

The general form of a limiter extension configuration exposes these
fields, one specific setting per condition, and one default
value. Generally, the name of the limiter matches the name of its
specific configuration field, so `token_bucket_limiter` has a
configuration named `token_bucket`. For example:

```yaml
some_rate_limiter:
  type: extension:specific_limiter
  config:
    unit: request_items/second
    optional_descriptors: [tenant_form_a, tenant_form_b]
    conditions:
    - name: first
      entries: { ... }
      specific: { ... } # first condition specifics
      cardinality: { ... }
    - name: second
      entries: { ... }
      specific: { ... } # second condition specifics
      cardinality: { ... }
    specific: { ... }   # default condition specifics
    cardinality: { ... }

> ```

Reviewer 2: I must admit I didn't fully understand this configuration and the concept of `specific_limiter`.

Multiple implementations of each extension type will be defined, and
for each of the two interfaces, a standard thread-local implementation is
provided: `token_bucket_limiter` for rate limits and
`semaphore_limiter` for resource limits.

### Resource limiters

The built-in thread-local resource limiter is a semaphore that restricts the
total weight of some concurrent activity, for example the number of
requests in flight, the total memory in use, or the number of items in
a queue. The semaphore acts as a gate, limiting the amount of weight
admitted into a logical-admitted state.

> The main resource limiter interface **acquire** returns a reservation

Reviewer 3: I think this needs a clearer rule. This section says a resource hold can live in `Context` and follow the request, but later says holds are `!Send`. If the request then crosses a topic or moves to another core, that seems hard to make safe. Can we define whether holds stay out of `Context`, or get released and re-acquired at those boundaries?

responsible releasing it. The detailed Rust ownership mechanics are an
out of scope here (see
[otel-arrow#3316](https://github.com/open-telemetry/otel-arrow/pull/3316),
however the main requirement is that owners are responsible for
releasing resource reservations and sometimes the reservation is
carried by the request, to be dropped at the same time. Additionally,
resource holds do not automatically cross shared boundaries (i.e.,
they are `!Send`). Sub-components within the engine (e.g., channels)
assume responsibility for resources, and special nodes (e.g., topic
exporter and receiver) will require an explicit mechanisms to transfer
resource holds across threads and CPUs.

The resource limiter extension interface also gives limiters control
over the total number of waiters and/or the total amount of pending
weight through its reservation interface. The built-in semaphore
limiter's specific configuration, for example:

```yaml
semaphore:
  admitted: 100_000_000  # max admitted weight
  waiting:  20_000_000   # max waiting weight
  waiters:  100          # max number waiting
  mode:     lifo         # prioritize freshness

> ```

Reviewer 2: Related to my previous comment about using declarative policies, I think we could come up with a resource policy definition that is a bit more explicit and easier to understand than this one :-)

### Rate limiters

> The rate limiter interface **limit** returns a reservation object. If

Reviewer 3: This seems inconsistent with the earlier rate-limit definition. If rate tokens are consumed immediately and not returned, then an earlier grant cannot really be “cancelled” when a later limiter fails. I think this needs a clear reserve/commit/cancel rule for correctness, not just as an efficiency follow-up. For example, all limiters could first reserve, then commit only after every limiter grants.

the rate reservation was a success, the caller just continues. If the
reservation was not granted, limiters may return to the
caller an option to wait. The option to wait is cancellable.

The built-in token bucket limiter's specific configuration, for
example:

```yaml
token_bucket:
  allow:    100_000_000  # maximum per interval
  burst:    20_000_000   # maximum individual weight
  interval: 60s          # interval duration
  waiters:  100          # max number waiting
  mode:     fifo         # prioritize fairness

> ```

Reviewer 2: If I want to apply rate limiters and/or resource limiters per tenant, how should I proceed?

### Shared limiters

Sharing limiter extensions at the pipeline-group and engine scope
(i.e., across threads or CPUs) in the dataflow engine requires careful
attention to avoid synchronization costs.  The built-in token bucket
and semaphore limiters support thread-local use only, so they are
defined with pipeline-scope. The dataflow engine extension mechanism
supports requesting shared extensions at wider scopes generally, so

> limiter scope can be thread-local (pipeline), CPU-local (pipeline

Reviewer 3: This scope model (pipeline / group / engine) seems to overlap with the existing `resources` policy framework in `config/src/policy.rs`, while the current `memory_limiter` is restricted to top-level policy only. Can we clarify whether these new per-scope limiters are meant to extend that framework or replace it?

requests in the background and asynchronous or relaxed-memory
mechanisms to refresh hot-path limiter state.

Among open-source global rate limit solutions, Envoy implements the
[gRPC Global Rate Limit
service](https://github.com/envoyproxy/ratelimit); another popular
solution is
[Gubernator](https://github.com/gubernator-io/gubernator). Global rate
limit extensions will support mapping fields of the tenant descriptor
into rate-limit requests on systems such as these.

Shared resource limiters may be implemented using conventional
synchronization primitives, for example limiters with Mutex-wrapped
internal state, but as with shared rate limiter, these implementations
should try to leverage thread-local state and separate their hot and
cold paths to avoid interference with the dataflow engine.

The limiters described in previous examples have been declared in
thread-local scope, making limits per-tenant and per-pipeline. To
implement engine-wide or group-wide limits on a per-tenant bases,
there are two options:

1. Use a group- or engine-shared limiter instance.
2. Route the data by tenant descriptor to a single pipeline, then use a thread-local limiter instance.

> Both are reasonable options.

Reviewer 2: Is option 1 really reasonable?

I think option 2 is more appropriate for our engine and our constraints. We could imagine a concept of a tenant cell combined with the concept of topics to implement efficient multi-tenancy in our engine. I'll try to define this concept of a tenant cell more clearly later on.

### Example limiter yaml

Completing the example started above, we can use the three descriptors
declared above to implement two rate limiters.

```yaml
descriptors: { ... }
groups:
  main-group:
    # Extensions defined at pipeline-group level are shared
    pipelines:
      main-pipe:
        extensions:
          # Extensions defined at pipeline level are thread-local.
          # The first rate limit applies to the customer.
          customer_rate:
            type: extension:token_bucket_limiter
            config:
              unit: network_bytes/second
              optional_descriptors: [enduser_tenant_modern, enduser_tenant_legacy]
              conditions:
              # This gives each workspace with customer_id=bigfish more allowance.
              - name: bigfish
                entries:
                - key: workspace_id
                - key: customer_id
                  value: bigfish
                token_bucket:
                  allow: 50_000   # 50KB/s allowance per pipeline PER CORE
                  burst: 100_000  # 100KB maximum size PER CORE
                cardinality:

>                   max_count: 1000 # Up to 1000 workspaces (single customer)

Reviewer 2: This is a policy :-)

              # Every combination of { customer_id != bigfish, workspace_id }
              # uses this limit PER CORE.
              token_bucket: { allow: 25_000, burst: 50_000 }
              # Limit to 10000 buckets, the point where isolation breaks down.
              cardinality:
                max_count: 10000
                # When the limit is reached, choose to "break" isolation
                # or else choose to "reject" the tenant.
                failure_mode: break

          # Second rate limit applies to the OBO service
          obo_rate:
            type: extension:token_bucket_limiter
            config:
              unit: network_bytes/second
              required_descriptors: [onbehalfof_tenant]
              # ...

        nodes:
          otlp:
            type: receiver:otlp
            capabilities:
              # Multiple rate limiters are listed with numeric sorting key "/N".
              rate_limit/0: obo_rate

>               rate_limit/1: customer_rate

Reviewer 2: How does that work when the number of tenant is high/dynamic?

            config:
              # determine which tenant descriptors are evaluated
              descriptors: [enduser_tenant_modern, enduser_tenant_legacy, onbehalfof_tenant]
              protocols:
                grpc:
                  listening_addr: "127.0.0.1:4317"
```

In this example, where multiple limiters are bound to a node as with
`rate_limit/0` and `rate_limit/1` above, they are evaluated in
ascending numeric order and all must grant for the request to proceed.
If a limiter failure causes the request to short-circuit, the granted
requests will be cancelled. Specific implementation details are
out-of-scope, see open questions.

> ### Limiter fairness

Reviewer 2: This document/topic is a big piece of work, so I'll stop my review here for now. I'm sure some of my questions/comments will be answered later, but I hope some of them will remain valid even after a full review.

In any case, this document represents a major specification and design effort. I think we should not hesitate to spend time on it to make sure we're aligned on the approach.

condition) pairs: `C_reachable <= P <= D_recv * C_reachable`, the
upper bound reached only when a limiter binds multiple same-schema
descriptors.

The space used in this approach:

- resolved descriptor values: `O(D_recv * k_d)`
- precomputed lookup keys: one fixed-size fingerprint per applicable pair,
  total size `O(P)`.

The time used in this approach:

- context creation: `O(H + D_recv * k_d)` to resolve descriptors and
  materialize values, plus `O(P * k_c)` to project and hash one lookup
  key per applicable pair
- limiter lookup: one `O(1)` table probe per applicable (descriptor,
  condition) pair, `O(P)` total, independent of `k_d` and `k_c`,
  because projection and hashing cost were paid at context creation.

### Limiter observability

Limiters record a primary observability signal with the declared units,
exposing the current value of the limiter.

- For rate limiters, an OpenTelemetry Counter named `otelcol.rate_limiter.accepted` measuring the accepted weight
- For resource limiters, an OpenTelemetry UpDownCounter named `otelcol.resource_limiter.admitted` measuring the currently admitted weight

Each of these uses the following dimensions:

- Condition name

> - Key:values in condition entries of matching bucket

Reviewer 3: Can we clarify the intended metric-label policy for tenant values? Customer IDs, workspace IDs, and subscription IDs may be sensitive or high-cardinality even when bucket count is bounded, so it would help to say whether these values are emitted, hashed, or disabled by default.
